



THE BALLARAT RIOTS. (1854, December 8). The Courier (Hobart, Tas. : 1840 - 1859), p. 2. Retrieved September 28, 2025, from http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article2240571

We resume our precis of the important intelligence received from Melbourne by the London steamship

(yesterday), giving full particulars of the collision between the military and the Ballarat rioters.

We may first of all mention that Melbourne was solely protected by marines and police, and a further reinforcement of the latter left town on Saturday. The police have also been withdrawn From Williams-town and other stations. On Saturday an order was issued by the Lieutenant-Governor commanding all the clerks at the various Government offices to be sworn in as special constables; and the Mayor, Messrs. Hall and Hodgson, J. P's., attended at the Police-office for the purpose of administering the prescribed oath, and about forty persons were sworn in accordingly. The step was anything but agreeable to the officials in question ; but there was no alter-native for them but to obey.

To follow up the order of proceedings at the diggings. The correspondent of the Geelong Adver-tiser, under date December 1st, has the following: -

Event follows event here so quickly, that unless each is narrated immediately on its occurrence, it appears as if months old. However, I mean to run the risk of being charged with retailing old news rather than leave you uninformed of the main facts of which, not being present myself, till now I was unable to get a correct version.

Well then, our present state began from one man on Eureka asking the favour of a word from an officer in command of the body of military, which came in from Melbourne on the evening of the 28th, by Eu-reka, to whom the officer replied "I hold no commu-nication with rebels," Soon after this a man with a blunderbuss happened to pass along the road on which the military were marching, and from some cause, which I am unable to learn, had his weapon taken from him, immediately after some ten men of the "Bakery Hill mob" set on the detachment, took from 20 to 30 stand of arms from the soldiers, hunted them and then seized on the carts which were conveying the store of ammunition, ran them down a hill into some old ground and coolly searched them to see if there were any cannons stowed away in them, as had been reported ; they found none, but came on no incon-siderable quantity of cartridges which are now in their possession. It was in this onset that Captain Young received his hurts, of which he is still in a very precarious state.

Information of the affair having been sent to the Camp, a body of mounted troopers were sent to the rescue to form a rear guard ; these men covered the march of the military, every now and then whirling round and checking the diggers who hung on the rear. This operation had been gone through several times, until when the bridge on the Flat was reached a determined stand was made, and on a volley of

stones being thrown here, as had been done several times before, a charge was made among the crowd. The swords were freely used, which so provoked the men assembled who chanced to be armed that they fired on them; I believe the troopers fired in return, but ultimately made for the Camp. This is as far as I can make out, from parties present, what hap-pened about 10 o'clock on the night of the 28th.

Next day the meeting was held on the Bakery Hill, as I have informed you, to which I may add that three cheers were given for Mr. Fawkner, the tried friend of the diggers, and the same and a vote of thanks to Messrs. Ireland and Stavely for their handsome conduct in the matter of fees in the defence

cause.

Yesterday all was quiet up to eleven o'clock, and

would have been so yet had not the attempt been made to look for licences; some of those who were first asked, instead of licenses, I believe, showed their cards of membership of the Reform League, and when about to be taken into custody escaped among the Gravel Pit workings ; more force was soon sent for and arrived, they drew up on the New Road, when Messrs. Rede and Johnstone advanced in front of them to a crowd, the former gentleman tried to per-suade those assembled and still gathering, to disperse ; failing to do this, he said he must read the Riot Act, and use force. Several parties remonstrated with him on the impolicy of the course he was following. Mr. Rede replied that he was merely carrying out the law as it at present stood, and that he was deter-mined to do at all hazards. He then began to read

the Riot Act, at which time I was standing near him, as a large body of troops and foot police were at some distance behind me. I considered it my safer

course to shift my quarters, which I did, but soon found that the Riot Act had been got through at such a telegraphic speed, that notwithstanding a thrice repeated "God save the Diggers," I was well nigh caught in the rush of troopers, consequent on the

order "draw swords and advance."

Although I am not very intimate with the Riot Act, still I think that it is so long that there was an impossibility in the way of its being read in the time occupied by Mr. Rede.

I am borne out in the supposition by the informa-tion of several parties who assert that but a portion of it was read. If so I believe that the consequent proceedings were illegal.

Immediately after the first charge, matters became so general and complicated that I can furnish but a poor narrative; there was rushing here, then back again, officers and orderlies galloped wildly along the new road, swords rattled, shots were fired, and single prisoners were taken, and marched to the camp. Some I hear are charged with having had no licences, others with attempted rescue, and a few with firing on the military and police. Monday's Police Court will, I expect, put me in possession of the real state of the facts. It was currently reported that one digger had been killed, but I cannot vouch for the truth of it. Several of the diggers I know were seriously wounded, and I saw blood marks on a few of the police.

About half-past 12 the whole force was marched up to the camp again. They were all under arms when the express left, and there is still a large force employed in guarding every avenue to the Camp, and patrolling in every direction.

At three o'clock an impromptu meeting was held on Bakery Hill, when volunteers were called for, and instantly stepped forward to the amount of five hun-dred men or so : many, though not all, of these men were armed. They assembled round the Australian

flag, which has now a permanent flag-staff, chose their leaders, and drafted off detachments for different duties. Before separating, the volunteers were impressed with the necessity of strictly respecting property in the event of any disturbance, at the peril of instant death. They all knelt down around the flag, swore to defend each other, and prayed heaven to prosper them.

Among the other arrangements was the setting off of fifty men to visit the tents and stores to procure arms and ammunition. This they were doing all the evening, and I hear they have been very successful.

One thing was very remarkable — the almost, if not actual absence of drunken men — once or twice a cheer broke forth, but in general a settled determi-

nation appeared to have fallen on them — they felt the solemnity of the occasion.

I am informed that the owners of houses facing the back part of the camp in Lydiard-street have had orders to fire their premises if an attack is made on the camp by the diggers, lest they should be used as covers from which the diggers might annoy them while engaged in defending the point.

Barricades of all kinds are being thrown up inside and around the camp, on which it is considered that an attack is shortly to be made. No cannon, I believe, has yet arrived, though I hear that Captain McMahon is to be in before ten o'clock to-day, with eighty troopers and some half dozen pieces.

A deputation from here went to Creswick today ; and whether from a suspicion that assistance would

be wanted there, or positive information received, it was deemed necessary to send a body of troopers there late yesterday afternoon. The bells at the various houses of worship are to be rung to collect the volunteers that the day's arrangements may be

made.

The diggers hold that they are right at present — the Camp does the same - the public can judge from

the facts before them. The opinions of most disin-terested persons here are, as the authorities assert, they were but carrying out the law ; but it is asserted that as matters stood, the hunting for licenses was alike unwise and indicative of a wish on the part of the authorities here to hurry on a collision.

The new Commission of investigation is, I think, in a fix. If some of the members attend to their duties in the Council, which they should do, during the passing of the Estimates, our interest, although most pressing, must be laid aside for a time, while every hour proves how instantly this Commission should set to work. And if we are now attended to, can the interests of the colony justly want the services of Messrs. Fawkner and O'Shanassy ? Turn which way you will, there are serious questions for consideration, and not one of which can be deferred with safety to the colony.

About 300 horse and foot-military and police have just returned from Bakery Hill, where they went to disperse some men who had been seen to assemble there about half-an-hour before. They took no prisoners, because when they arrived there was none to lay hold of. The parties in question on the hill were some 100 of the Volunteers, who had been on night-service as outposts, &c.

There is no denying the plain fact that organization is going on rapidly ; even now the troops here are doubly outnumbered, and in a few days, unless Sir Charles interferes by sending up some men of peace immediately, no matter how brave all the force in the colony, if concentrated here, would find work enough to do. Still, what I consider the plain truth — I say it neither as threat or bounce — many fear that harm will be done to day. I can only say that things look as

bad as they almost possibly can. Is there no peace-

maker?

THE AUSTRALIAN FLAG.

The following remarkable scene at the inauguration of the "Australian flag," and the organisation of the first " rebel army" in these colonies, was narrated to me, says the Correspondent of the Geelong Advertiser, by an intelligent gentleman who was an eye witness of the greater part of the proceedings. Observing a large crowd of men collected on the Bakery Hill, on Thursday last, he rode up to see what was going on. On arriving there, he found a tall flag-staff erected, on which was floating a blue flag with a white cross upon it. In each corner of the cross and in its centre was a blue star, the five stars representing, he was informed, the five Australian colonies. Around the flag-staff the diggers, for such the majority appeared, stood with rifles in their hands, or revolvers at their sides. In the centre a large open circular space was left, in which, and at the foot of the flag-staff, was a stump and the committee of the armed assemblage. The leader or principal man of the committee now mounted the stump, and called upon all present to swear allegiance to the flag that waved over them, and to acknowledge no other. This ceremony being gone through, nearly every one present then went to the stump and signed a large document of some kind. The leader was a tall, good-looking man, an Irishman, who evidently had seen something of military service somewhere — most likely, from his accent, in Mexico — and who spoke in a tone of authority, and displayed good temper and much ability. With him were two or three foreigners, also genteel military-looking men, who took every conspicuous part in the proceedings. After all had signed the paper at the stump, the leader again ascended the stump, and, in a mild but

firm voice, said it would be necessary that organisation then should immediately be effected, and requested that the requisite number of volunteers for the first company should step forward. To this request a number of men acceded, when the committee having

selected an officer and eighty of the candidates, all armed with a rifle or fowling piece, a space was opened in the ring, and the leader again mounting the stump said "Comrades, assist me to pray for the safety of

these men." He then requested them to march off in the direction of the Gravel Pits, and calling upon those present to follow his example, he bared his head, knelt on one knee, raised his rifle and face to Heaven, and said—"Bless these men that go to fight for their rights and liberties. May Heaven shield them from danger." The second, third, fourth, and fifth com-pany were formed in a similar manner, the same

benediction being pronounced on their departure from the stump. On the formation of the sixth being attempted, it was found that there were about a dozen men short of the eighty for want of muskets or rifles. The leader immediately ordered the deficiency to be made up by those who had revolvers. About a hundred presented themselves, and twelve were chosen to make up the company, who marched off in

the same manner as the others had done. My infor-mant, who, from a personal and private intimacy with many present, had been allowed to remain a spectator was now requested to sign the paper the others had done. Declining to do so, some angry and threatening language was used, but through the intervention of

some of those he knew, no violence was offered. He, however, thought it prudent to withdraw in

time.

The usual number of exaggerated reports continue

to be flying about this morning in reference to affairs at Ballaarat. A mounted trooper arrived express from Melbourne with a request from the Government that no powder should be delivered from the maga-zine; and that none should be allowed to leave town for the diggings, if possible. The appearance of the

trooper's reeking horse induced some one to suppose

what his errand was ; and it was confidently rumoured shortly after his arrival that the diggers had again attacked the military, were getting the best of the fight, and would likely be in possession of the Camp

before the reinforcements from Melbourne would

arrive.

The passengers by the coaches report variously, — some, that they think the physical force party have

had enough of it at present, and will bide their time for a more favourable opportunity ; others, that they

are thoroughly satisfied; while some say that the

organization of fresh hands is being proceeded with, and that strong reinforcements are expected from Bendigo, Creswick's Creek, &c.

Among the killed are reported to be two well-known characters — one an Italian named Carvalho, who held the office of brigadier in the Roman army, and acted as secretary to the celebrated Massini at the siege of Rome; the other is a Mr. Ross, a Cana-dian, one of the deputies appointed by the diggers. Several of the wounded have arrived in Geelong, and

are being cared for.

THE TROOPS.

The particulars of the affray alluded to are stated in a subsequent letter as follows :—

The insurgent party had been out most of Saturday on various duties, one of which was watching after the rumoured approach of some additional force, which it was their intention to wait for, and, if pos-sible, drive back. Not having fallen in with this party, they returned to the encampment at Eureka, where a kind of barricade or stockade of slabs had been erected. Here, after orders when to reassemble, the whole force was ordered to go home. This most of them did, unless a few, some one hundred and fifty men, who would not go home. Outposts were usually placed a long way out, in this instance there were none ; and through some instant communication on this subject to the authorities, they were made aware of this fact, and determined to surprise them. The first intimation which was given of the presence of Her Majesty's troops was either a demand from the officer in command that the insurgents should lay down their arms, or else a trumpet blast at some one hundred yards distant from the stockade. When the demand was made, either a negative answer or silence was the result. The troops were then ordered to fire, as had been agreed on, two rounds of blank cartridges. The diggers returned the fire. Five soldiers fell at the first fire. The troopers and a few foot police were present, but at some distance, the main fighting part devolved on the soldiers. The

diggers, as I said before, numbered some one hundred and fifty. They were in several divisions, riflemen, &c., in all five. After a contest of about from fifteen to twenty minutes the whole affair was over. The insurgent party were thrown into irremediable confu-sion from the division having revolvers, in sheer daring, running up towards the soldiers to ensure a better aim, and thereby preventing the riflemen and other comrades from supporting them. The stockade was ultimately surrounded, and those who still re-mained taken prisoners and marched off to the camp. When the soldiers had once tasted blood they became violent, and had not the officers used every exertion, the prisoners would have been mur-dered on the spot. When it was clearly seen by the officers that no further resistance was offered, they wished no more blood shed. Mr. Commissioner Amos is also most favourably spoken of; he saved two lives, which else would have been instantly sacrificed. Mr Commissioner Johnstone interfered in a praise-worthy manner to preserve property which had been set on fire, and eventually succeeded in saving it

The party on night service have two men pri-

soners; they were endeavouring to pass themselves off as diggers, but some one recognised them as being

attached to the camp. They have them in

confinement.

Advertiser Office, Saturday, 2 a.m.

We have reliable information from Ballarat up to yesterday (Friday) afternoon. Humfray and all the other respectable "moral force" members of the Reform League have withdrawn their names, and the movement is now headed by some persons hitherto

unknown, whose object seems to be less the redress of grievances than the gratification of their evil passions and their thirst for plunder. Business was entirely suspended, and everything looked

gloomy.

The accounts which have come to hand from Ballarat (says the Age) are altogether so various and conflicting in their character, that we hesitate to give them shape before they have assumed a more tangible and satisfactory form. It was, however, positively stated to us by a gentleman who arrived in this city on Saturday night, that the diggers of Ballarat had

received a reinforcement to their numbers in 8000 men or upwards, from Creswick's Creek, and that numbers were hourly expected to arrive from the other digging districts; so that the conclusion has been come to, to make a concentration of forces at Ballarat, and by this means to overawe the military. It is well known that the diggers are submitting to be drilled by an ex-sergeant of a foot regiment, and that extensive military preparations are being made in their behalf. It is also confidently told us by the authority alluded to before, that the next act decided on to take place is the burning down of the Camp and all other offices connected with the Government on the spot. As we are not desirous of joining in exciting our readers by circulating rumours which have no substantial foundation, we must ask them to abate their curiosity till to-morrow, when we have no doubt but that more reliable information will come to hand. We may mention, however, that it is reported to be the intention of the gentlemen who have been sworn in as special constables in Melbourne, to hold a meeting for the purpose of presenting a memorial to His Excellency, remonstrating against the Govern-ment policy with reference to the management of the gold fields, which has brought the public peace into such jeopardy. Much depends on the attitude now

assumed by the Executive.

EXCITEMENT AT CRESWICK'S CREEK. An impromptu meeting had also been held at Creswick's Creek, when the following resolutions were moved and seconded unanimously.

Moved by Mr. Black, seconded by Mr. Kennedy — 1. That this meeting expresses its sympathy with the step taken by the inhabitants of Ballaarat to obtain the release of their fellow-diggers, McIntyre, Fletcher, and Westerby, from an unjust imprison-ment, as well as with the movement made yesterday against the Gold Commission, by the destruction of the diggers' licenses; and pledges itself to co-operate with them in their efforts to place the management of the gold fields on a just and firm basis, and to free it from the charge of dishonour and corruption.

Proposed by Mr. Nolan, seconded by Mr. Reynolds — 2. This meeting, regarding the past proceedings of the Executive of this colony in their management of

the gold-fields, and, feeling it is also an act of great

injustice for the Government to keep back their proper rights as citizens, now welcome the foundation of the "Reform League," and are prepared to support such

movement, with a view to establish their rights and liberties as free people.

About 2000 were assembled; many licenses were destroyed, — some burnt, some torn. 150 men arrived, armed, from the Creek. Detachments have been sent from time to time during the day, as they perfected themselves in their temporary drill. About 500, it is supposed, have arrived.

##########################

FATAL COLLISION AT BALLAARAT. (1854, December 8). The Courier (Hobart, Tas. : 1840 - 1859), p. 3. Retrieved September 28, 2025, from http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article2240569

FATAL. COLLISION AT BALLAARAT

Monday, 3 a.m.

AT the above hour a gentleman arrived at this office who had ridden- through express, leaving Ballaarat at half-past-one yesterday. He brings us the following disastrous report :

(From our own Correspondent.)

At four a.m. this morning (Sunday) the troopers advanced on the right of the Warraneep Gulley, and another division on the left of the Eureka line, encompassing the camp of the diggers. A shout was raised, and after a sharp firing of about twenty minutes the troopers called to the soldiers, who were advancing, that it was all over.

The camp of the diggers was constructed of piles of slabs collected from the neighbouring holes.

I enclose the official return, as known at 9 a.m. To-morrow you shall have the real truth. I do not believe but that the loss of the military, to say nothing of the Wounded, is considerably more than acknowledged. 

Ballaarat, December 3rd, 1854.- Sir.- I have the honour to inform you that the casualties on the part of the military are 1 private of the 12th regiment killed, 2 privates of tho 40th killed. Captain Wise, of the 40th, is dangerously wounded ; Lieutenant Paul, of the 12th, seriously wounded. Several privates       of 40th and 12th more or less wounded. No official return has yet been made, but the correspondent of the Argus can have it to-morrow by applying at the

camp.

One hundred and twenty-five prisoner made, but the casualties on the part of the insurgents are not known. I have the honor to be, Sir,

Your most obedient servant,

ROBERT REDE,

Resident Commissioner.

In the case of Captain Wise, amputation is con-sidered necessary, he having received two wounds in the leg. This is but the beginning of the end. The reporter of the Ballarrat Times has been taken, and his life was with dificulty saved from the hands of the infuriated soldiers. A coloured man, recognised by a soldier, would have been shot in the camp had it not been for the officers. Nearly all the ringleaders

are taken.

Fifteen are lying dead in the Eureka camp. Sixteen are dangerously wounded.

A German has received five different wounds.

The Eureka Camp, as well as the stores and tents in the neighbourhood, have been burnt to the ground, mid considerable loss of property has ensued

thereby.

A former reporter for the M. M. Herald, a Mr. Haslam, was shot in the shoulder by the troopers.

The London Hotel is the chief repository for the dead and wounded. The troopers swept the diggings, and are making several captures now at the moment

of writing.

The most harrowing and heartrending scenes amongst the women and children I have witnessed through this dreadful morning. Many innocent persons have suffered, and many are prisoners who were there at the time of tbe skirmish, but took no active part.

10 a.m. Several waggons containing wounded and confiscated property have passed on their way to the Camp. At present every one is as if stunned, and but few are to be seen about.

The flag of the diggers, " The Southern Cross," as well as the "Union Jack," which they had to hoist underneath, were captured by the foot police.

Had the diggers fired longer the loss to the military would have, been immense, and they, as it was, acted with a precision and a regularity admired even by the officers of the military.

Report says that only a small division of the diggers were attacked this morning, merely a guard of relief enough to protect the " Eureka Camp " Of the rest, some were off duty, but the majority were in the bush, and guarding the roads to Melbourne and

Geelong.

MARTIAL LAW PROCLAIMED AT

BALLAARAT.

A Gazette Extraordinary was issued on Thursday last, containing tho following Proclamation:

PROCLAMATION.

By His Excellency Sir Charles Hotham, &c.

Whereas Large bodies of aimed men have arrayed themselves against Her Majesty's forces and the con-stitued authorities, and having committed acts of open rebellion : And whereas tor tho effectual sup-pression thereof it is imperatively necessary that

Martial Law should be administered and executed within the limits hereinafter described: Now I, the Lieutenant Governor of the said colony, with the advice of the Executive Council thereof, do hereby command and proclaim that Martial Law from after

Twelve of the Clock at noon on Wednesday, the sixth day of December instant, shall and may be adminis-tered and executed against every person and persons within the said limits who shall at any time after the said hour commit any act of rebellion, any treason, treasonable or seditious practices, or other outrage or misademeanour whatsoever within the following limits, that is to say - Commencing at the junction of the Yarrowee River and Williamson's Creek, thence by a straight line to the junction of tho Lal Lal Rivulot with the Moorabool River; thence by that river to its source in the great Dividing Range ; thence by that range to the boundary of the County of Ripon, and by that boundary south-westerly to the township of Carngham, at Bailie's Creek : thence by a line south-easterly to the junction Of the River Yarrowee with Williamson's Creek aforesaid : And I do hereby, with the advice aforesaid, order and authorise all officers commanding Her Majesty's fores to employ them with the utmost vigour and decision for the immediate suppression of the said rebellion and offences, and to proceed against and punish every person and persons acting, aiding, or in any manner assisting in the said rebellion and offences, according to Martial Law, as to them shall seem expedient for tho punishment of all such persons : And I do hereby especially declare and proclaim that no sentence of death shall be carried into execution against any such person without my express consent thereto; und I do hereby, with the advice aforesaid, notify this my proclamation to all subjects of Her Majesty in the colony of Victoria.

Given under my hand and seal of the colony, at Melbourne, this 4th day of December, in the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and fifty-four, and in the eighteenth year of Her Majesty's

reign.

the and

ma«

upo hav

A mili the

poli left the flan

sev»

dig)

retr had this

plot

huil and dree timi thai

can

C thal the the nut!

ven retí fore

.1

exe

tha Get duti pea alio thr< Cic

wei

det the

eve wot

int

1 app the

daj

thii ma ses eví

cip

"v wit

KUI

< ins

un

the the for the at wl del tin

nu cn coi

L.s.) ' Cn ARLES HOTHAM.

ly His Excellency's command, ,

JOHN FOSTER.

God save the Queen I

ENROLMENT OF THE COLONISTS.

A second Gazette Extraordinary was issued in the

afternoon ns under :

" NOTICB - Recent events at the mines at Ballaarat render it necessary for all true subjects of the Queen, and all strangers who ha\o received hospitality mid protection under her flag, to nsoist in preserving social order and maintaining the supremacy of thJ

law.

"The question now agitated by the disaffection, is not whether an enactment can be amendai or ought to be repealed, but whether the law is, or is not, to be administered hi the name ofHei Majesty. Anarchy and confusion must ensue, unless those who cling to the institutions and the soil of their adopted countrv step prominently forward.

"HlsExoellenev relies upon the loyalty and sound feeling of tha colonist«.

" AU faithful subjects and all strangers who have had equal rights extended to them arc therefore called Upon to enrol themselves, and be prepared to assemble at such pjaous as may* be appointed by the civic

Gi

tin

]

rae am

Pi i ter foil infi tur

] mil

we

kil

1 Go hai the tia of sed

ac we

<

loy

tru wil tra

] of ho

cat

pa]

authorities in Melbourne end Geelong, and by the pr< magistrals in the aérerai towns of the oolony.

' ', ' <. CHAS. HOTBAU. " Melbourne, 4th December, 1854."

,1 FURTHER PABTICULAßS.

Thwfaets of the unfortunate affray 'at Ballaarat, as we have ?been enabled to gather them, in addition to tho huh ¡ed statement received at ,a late hour yesterday morning, appear to be as follows: Up to Sunday morning the officers and men attached to the Government Camp, after having fortified their position in as strong'a manner as the time would allow, had remained closely1 ensconced behind their entrench-ments. On that day, however, having received intelligence that the main body of the insurgents (as,they now appearto be called) had started off to inter-cept the advance of the anticipated reinforcements of military from Melbourne, the authorities at the Camp determined on taing the camp of the diggers by surprise ; and consequently a little before day-break the troops and police were under arms, and just upon the first blush of daw&jgiey inarched upon the camp at Eureka. The attack upon the Govern-ment Camp bad been so frequently spoken of, that the officials determined to forestal any such attempt, and to take the initiative, (rom enquiries we have made, we are led to believe that this' throat of attack upon 'the camp is one of tho many frabrications that have helped on the present entanglement.

At'daylight"rather more than three.hundred men,

mOitary-aud police, marched upon the Eureka Camp,

-the military lorming the centre, and the troopc rs and police the two wings. The police on the right and left of the main body of soldieis were enabled, under the heavy fire kept np, to surround, or rather to out-flank those who defended the insurgent position ; the severe fire maintained by the troops soon obliged the diggers to withdraw fiom before it; and as they retreated they were pounced upon by the police, who had covered the flank and íear of tlicir.position. lu this way the discomfiture of the insurgents was com-plete. It was reckoned that there- wer« oboist two hundred and fifty men in the camp when attacked ; and when wë reckon about tweuty killed, one hun-dred and twenty-five prisoneis, and perhapB three timcB as many wounded as killed, it will be found that only a very feW'of the number holding the camp can have escaped together.

On the two preceding days, during the skirmishes that hod on sued between the diggers and the jKilice, the diggers had appeared to have rather the better of the work, and this moro than aught else induced the authorities to-strike a heavy blow, not only to pre-vent the'organisation that was going on. but to retrieve their lo«* honours before the arrival of rein-forcements took the chance out of their hands.

The insurgents, as,we leam, are all, with very few exceptions, diggers, and we regret to hear it reported that very many of them are French, Americans, and Germans. Our informant tells us that gi cat intimi-dation is used by those under arms towards the peaceful and industrious diggers, no work being allowed, and any man seen going to his hole being threatened with the consequences. At Creswick's Creek this was more particularly the case. The men were all woiking steadily enough there until the detachment from Eureka reached them, and then they were told by the leader of this detachment that every one of thom that did not come out and fight would be maiked, and would he sure to gain nothing

in the end.

The principal leader of the insurgents had been apprehended. Ile is stated to have tonneily been in the military profession, and has been, tor the last few days, in Iclatigable in his endeavour to give some-thing like organisation to the men under his com-mand. He is stated tobe an athletic and prepos-sessing young man of about thirty years of ago, with every disposition to enforce the most rigoious dis-cipline. "Any man," he is reported to-have said, " who is found stealing, or in any wa)' interfering with private property, may look to himself, for as »ure as death my gun shall find bun out "

Onr informant is of opinion that a main body of the insui gents are still lying in the Warraueep Bauges, unaware of the number of tioops sent up against tlie'ii, and consequently hoping to fall upou and cut them off very easily. Here they aie lying in wait for the troops, stopping or firing oil any passengers ou the toad, our own express having had two shots fired at bim. In this they have been wotully deceived, for while they will meet (if thev do meet at all with a detachment that on Sunday had reached no further than Bacchus Marsh) with au enemy of Miperior nu nbers to themselves, they will have left theil c unrados behind them to be cut oil' in detail, ami thus complete their discomfiture.

All places of business on the camp are closed. The banks, stores, gold-buying offices, evmy plice is shut up. men being too engrossed with the present movement evett to read a newspaper, but walking about silent and sullen, as if staggered with tho sud-denness and weight of tho present crWs. Tho»o well disposed to the cause of order, who, we mc gi vim to understand form the very large majori.y of the diggers, are praying anxiously for tho ai rival of tho anticipated reinforcement, as the sound of theil tia np upon the diggings is expected at once to restore older; whilst a most anxious wish has beou expressed that the Governor would go up to the ground, as it is thought that everything might be much more readily arranged on the spot between His Excellency and the diggers themselves, than it ever could be bv the intervention of delegates, proclamations, or petitions.

VR -Notice,

Government Camp,

Ballaarat, i 'co. 3rd, 18Ö4.

Her Majesty's forces were this morning fired upon by a large bolly of evil-disposed persons of various nations, who bad entrenched themselves in a stock-ade on the Eureka, and some officers and men hilled ; several of the riotuis have paid tho penalty of their crime, and a largo number are in custody..

AU well disposed persons me earnestly requested to return to their ordinary occupations, mi 1 to abstain from assembling in laíge gi mips, and ove.y piotectiou will be afforded to them by the authorities.

UoBbitT BEDE,

Resident Commissioner. God save the Quien.

Hero many persons exprws their determination to go on with their woik as usual. It U niaily time that something was d me, as many of the claims on the Gravel Pits are neally mined, owing to the hoight winch the water has risen in the shaft,

liu- is tin- affair ovei ? I sincerely hope so, though I fear not. Had I some« hat ioma accmate informa-tion, I could foi in an opinion on the subject ; but, as wo are, no one wishes to appear moro wise than his neighbour, reguJing the movements of either the ¡murgents or of the camp The principal leaders of the insurgents are still there. They made their escape

after the Eureka conflict.- Argus

D

lid



##########################

APA citation
GEELONG. (1854, December 29). The Argus (Melbourne, Vic. : 1848 - 1957), p. 4. Retrieved September 28, 2025, from http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article4802435

BALLAARAT. — THE STATEMENT OF FRANK
ARTHUR HASLEHAM.
NOW LYING WOUNDED AT BALLAARAT.
(From the Geelong Advertiser.)
“Whereas I, Frank Arthur Hasleham, a native
of the good town of Bedford, and son of a military
officer, to wit, William Gale Hasleham, who bore
his Majesty’s commission in the 48th foot, at
Talavera, and afterwards retired from the 6th
veteran battalion.
“Whereas I, the aforesaid, having, in my capa-
city of newspaper correspondent at Ballaarat,
shewn, on all proper occasions in general, so
especially during the late insurrectionary move-
ment here, a strong instinctive leaning to the side
of law, authority, and loyalty, was, on the morn-
ing of the 3rd instant, fired at and wounded at a
time when the affray was over, and the forces with
their prisoners were on the point of returning to
the Camp, and in a place whence the scene of
action was invisible, and where no other bloodshed
had taken place.
“On these considerations I desire to make on
oath the following statements of facts, as they
occurred, and as witnessed by others: —
“Shortly after daybreak on the morning men-
tioned, my three mates and myself were aroused
from sleep by the fire of musketry, a great, pro-
portion of the balls whistling over our tents. The
tent is pitched on a rising ground about 500 yards
south of the stockade; the tent and stockade, each
situated on an eminence, are separated by a large
gully running east and west, and comprising in
its breadth nearly the whole of the distance above
specified. Considerably alarmed at the continu-
ance of the firing, we at last got up, and went
outside, thinking to find a place of shelter or
comparative security. After I had gone outside
the firing gradually fell off, the stockade was un-
occupied, the insurgents’ flag was struck, and
whatever fighting was then going on was confined
to the further slope of the hill on which the stock-
ade was situated. As some desultory firing was
still going on, I advanced about fifty yards
down the gully, in order to insure safety by
getting upon lower ground; by this time, with
the exception of an occasional cheer from
the military or police, everything was perfectly
quiet, and from where I stood neither soldier nor
trooper was to be seen. A few minutes after a
small detachment of mounted police made its
appearance on the hill, and drew up in a line on
the other side of the stockade; the officer in com-
mand appeared to be haranguing them. I was
standing about three hundred yards from them,
several other people being near at hand. I saw
three troopers leave the ranks and advance to-
wards me; when one of them who rode consider-
ably ahead of the other two arrived within hail-
ing distance, he hailed me as a friend. Having
no reason to think otherwise of him, I walked
forward to meet him. After he had lured me
within safe distance, namely about four paces, he
levelled his holster pistol at my breast and shot
me. Previous to this, and while advancing to-
wards each other, he asked me if I wished to join
his force. I told him I was unarmed, and in a
weak state of health, which must have been
plain to him at the time, but added that I hoped
this madness on the part of the diggers would
soon be over. Upon that he fired.
“I told him who and what I was; that he had
made a grievous mistake; that he had killed me,
but I forgave him. To do the man justice, he
appeared much perplexed, and conscious of
having done wrong; but his comrades who had
posted themselves in the rear, coming galloping
up, threatening me with sword and pistol, he
seemed to stifle his feeling of the moment, and
became as blustering as they; they then drove me
between them towards the detachment before,
mentioned, threatening to cut me down every
time I halted or staggered from exhaustion.
Before we reached the detachment, two other
troopers rode out to meet us, one of them, pre-
senting a long pistol, wished to fire at me, but was
prevented. I was then searched for firearms, but
need scarcely say this was done to no purpose. I
was then handcuffed, and ordered to keep up with
the troop, who set forth at a trot to join the main
forces at the other side of the stockade. I ran
with them some twenty or thirty yards, my wound
bleeding profusely, when I began to feel myself
falling, and seeing nothing but certain death in
some shape or another in store for me, unless
could make my escape, I took the advantage of a
sharp turn, and finally succeeded in eluding pursuit.
suit.
“Eureka, Ballaarat
December 22, 1854. — Herald.”

###########################

APA citation
FORRIGN ANAROHISTS. (1854, December 29). The Argus (Melbourne, Vic. : 1848 - 1957), p. 5. Retrieved September 28, 2025, from http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article4802405

FOREIGN ANARCHISTS.

To the Editor of the Argus.

Sir,— Your paper of to-day contains a Military General Order, dated 22nd inst., respecting the death of Captain Wise, which, it states, resulted from the effects of the wounds he received in storm-ing the Eureka Stockade, which, the Major-General adds, "a numerous band of foreign anarchists and armed ruffians had converted into a stronghold."

Now, I ask you, Sir, if the use of such language in a Government officer as this will tend to allay the disgust felt at the merciless slaughter of the Ballaarat diggers, who took up arms after every other method had failed, to bring the Government to reason on the subject of their grievances? The victory obtained might have been enjoyed without such gratuitous insult and falsehood. If foreign anarchists enlisted, surely their names might be published, as well as those of the British prisoners

taken.

And now I am upon this subject, I would ask why the "Crowners' quest law" was set aside on this melancholy occasion? and why the Registrar of Deaths in the Ballaarat district does not pro-ceed at law against those who buried the men massacred by the troops, without presenting the usual certificates required by the act? Had a new-born infant died here, and been interred without such formalities being observed, a hundred to one but the Registrar would have proceeded against the offending party for the penalties. Why, then, such an evasion of the law at Ballaarat? Perhaps it was because the Government would have found out that there were no foreigners engaged in the affair, although it has endeavored to make it ap-pear as if they were the principal instigators in the rising, and not our fellow British subjects.

I am, Sir,

Your obedient servant and constant reader.

JUSTITIA.

Melbourne, 23rd December, 1854.

##########################

SUPREME COURT. (1855, March 27). The Age (Melbourne, Vic. : 1854 - 1954), p. 5. Retrieved September 28, 2025, from http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article154852643

SUPREME COURT.

Monday, March 26, 1855. Old Court. The State Trial concluded. (Before His Honor Mr. Justice Barry.

His Honor took his seat upon the Bench at ten o'clock. The following jury was sworn:— William Ballingall, South Melbourne, engraver. Alex. Bartholemew, Brighton Road, joiner. Jonah Buccolley, Brighton Road, bricklayer. Robt. Bruce, Kew, storekeeper. Wm. Bracher, Rowena street, merchant. Wm. Butterworth, Tanner street, storekeeper. Henry Bulge, Brighton Road, architect. Charles Butt, Lennox street, carpenter. Frederick Baines, Richmond Road, painter.

Albert Beet, Wellington street, storekeeper. James Butter, Millenbcck, farmer. Fred. Bernard, Smith street, cabinetmaker The following prisoners were then placed at the bar charged with High Treason:— Henry Reid, James McFie Campbell, William Molloy, Jacob Sorrenson, John Phelan, and Thomas Dignum.

The Attorney-General declined to proceed against the last named prisoner, on the ground that the evi-dence against him was not precisely as he had at first been led to believe. The prisoner was accord-ingly discharged. Messrs. Michie, Ireland, Cope, Dawson, Dunne, and Aspinall appeared for the defence, and the Attorney-General for the Crown. The Attorney-General briefly addressed the jury on the part of the Crown. He remarked that he had seen some of the present jury amongst those who were empanelled on the previous trials arising out of the same occurrences, but he did not regret this fact, as it had enabled the parties in question to arrive at a knowledge of the circumstances generally, of which, it would be impossible wholly to divest their minds and it was on this account the less necessary to repeat the history of what had taken place, as he had so often been compelled to do. They would learn from the evidence that all the prisoners were present in the stockade on the Sun-day morning, and only in the case of the prisoner Reid would an attempt be made to prove an alibi; but he believed that the evidence which would be brought forward for the purpose of sus-taining this defence was not inconsistent with the testimony of the witnesses for the Crown. The learned gentleman, after some few further remarks respecting the circumstances under which the other prisoners had been arrested, proceeded to call his witnesses. Mr. George Webster, J.P., repeated the testimony he had given on previous occasions. This witness was cross-examined by Mr. Ireland, chiefly with a view to show what had taken place on the Thursday. By Mr. Dawson: I have heard of a person named McGill. I don't remember hearing of him before I came to town. I have heard of him and Lawler. I am aware that a reward was offered for their appre-hension, and also for that of Lawler and Black, but I am not aware that these rewards were withdrawn. I believe they were not arrested, because they were

not in the stockade. The witness was subsequently re-examined by the Attorney-General, but nothing new was elicited from him. Henry Goodenough, trooper, repeated almost verbatim his previous testimony. The witness was cross-examined by Messrs. Ireland, Dawson, and Cope, but nothing material was elicited from him. Re-examined by the Attorney-General. It was in reply to a question, I said I would stand up for rights and liberties. Eugene Bellain, examined by the Attorney-Gene-ral: I was at Ballarat on Thursday, 30th November. I left for Melbourne on that day. I saw the prisoner Campbell going by the side of the stockade. A pis-tol shot was heard. I said to Campbell, "Which is the road to Melbourne?" Prisoner had his hands in his pocket. He said, "This is the road," endeavour-ing to lead us towards the tents. I knew the right road. We had met armed men previously on the diggings. They were in twos and fours. I turned off the road, and came in sight of about twenty men, armed with guns and pistols, standing upon the road. Campbell said, "Shoot them down." There was a discharge of firearms immediately after, as we were riding away. Campbell did not say anything about a trooper. He rode some dis-

tance into the bush, and in the evening returned into the diggings. Passing the Black Hill public house, about a dozen persons rushed out upon us, and stopped us. They asked me whether 1 was a trooper, and I replied I was not, and that he might see I was not by looking at my saddle. Cross-examined by Mr. Dawson: I was at this time an Assistant Government Surveyor at Ballarat, and knew perfectly well the condition of the gold-fields. I was dressed at the time as a country gentleman. I won't swear the arms which the men fired were loaded with ball. None of the first body of armed men, except Campbell said anything to us. Thos. Atkins, trooper, examined by the Attorney-General: I remember going to the Eureka on Sa-turday. I returned to the Ballarat camp. I saw about 300 men under arms, marching towards the old Melbourne road. I saw them taking horses in-discriminately, and leading them off to the Eureka. The stockade was not finished at this time. It was about four or five in the evening. The witness here repeated the evidence which he gave on Friday. He was not cross-examined.

Joseph Glover, trooper, examined by the Attorney-General: This witness also repeated his previous testimony relative to the capture of Mr. Amos, and the taking of his horse. He, also, was not cross-examined. Thomas Allen examined by the Attorney Gen-eral. The evidence of this witness in no respect dif-fered from his previous testimony. Mr. Ireland objected to the Crown examining so many witnesses, without connecting the prisoners with the circumstances detailed in the evidence. His Honor thought it was competent for the Crown to give evidence of the events for the purpose of showing the character of the occurrences with which the prisoners were charged with being con-nected. Mr. Michie supported the objection of Mr. Ireland. Mr. Dawson followed on the same side. He sub-mitted that evidence which might be sufficient to connect persons in England with an offence of this description would not be sufficient here, inasmuch as the migratory character of the population might prevent men from knowing what had occurred a few days previous to any particular event occurring on a particular spot. The Attorney-General explained that he had taken this course for the convenience of all parties. He did not think it would be convenient to prove in the first instance occurrences which took place on Sun-day when he wanted to give evidence of what had

happened on Wednesday, Thursday, and Friday. As regarded the possibility, of his not being able to con-nect the prisoners with the occurrences, he had that morning applied for the discharge of one man be-cause he found that there was only one witness to identify him instead of two, as he had supposed, owing to an error in taking down the evidence of one party. The examination of the witnesses was then pro-ceeded with. The witness was cross-examined by Mr. Michie, but his evidence, was almost a verbatim re petition of his former testimony : I did not hear of a marriage having taken place in the stockade on the Saturday. Some of the troopers have told me that in the evidence I was giving, I was going the wrong way about getting my claims from the Government. Samuel Furnell examined by the Attorney-General: I am a sub-inspector of police, and was in the attack of the stockade on the Sunday morning. I saw the prisoner Reid there. I saw an arm of some kind in his hand. I heard a shot but did not see the prisoner fire. We were moving them to the rear of the stockade, and on returning, I saw the prisoner again, and I then arrested him. I returned in five or six minutes. I ordered him to come out, and he would not do so. I fired my pistol at him, and some one (Mr. Foster, I believe), jumped over the stockade and brought him out. I do not know any of the other prisoners. I remember one man giving a sword to me. I cannot identify the man. Sergeant-major Lawler was present. I saw one of the men afterwards at the camp, whom I believed to be the man who gave me the sword, but I did not like to swear to him. I ordered eight mounted troopers and some foot police out to search for licenses in the usual way on the Thursday morning. I am not sure whether the mounted men had their carbines, but I rather think not. I was watching these men the whole time. I saw the foot constables disperse evidently to ask the miners for their licenses, and saw them immediately driven back. I then went down with some twenty mounted and a party of foot police, armed with muskets, to support them. When we got down, we found Mr. Johnstone in front of his men. The people were throwing mud and stones, aud using very abusive language. They were calling "Joe" and "jamb his tail." Capt. Carter asked Mr. Johnstone, was he going to collect licenses, and Capt. Carter said "Yes, of course." Capt. Carter then went down with two constables to ask a man for his licenses. One of the police was immediately cut down with an axe-handle. Mr. Reid was sent for, aud told the people to disperse. I saw shots fired. One shot was fired by a constable, at the man who cut down the first constable. There was another shot fired by a digger, named Campbell. I saw no shots fired by the police. Cross-examined by Mr. Michie: The substance of

the language used by the diggers was "Joe," and '"jamb his tail." I do not give the best expressions which they used, nor the worst. The language used did not disturb me much as I have been in the habit of being '"joed" for two or three years. I did not go out to collect licenses on that day. I went to support the men who were attacked. I gave directions to my men on the morning of the attack, on the Stockade, before we left the camp. I told the men they were to go on duty with the 40th and the 12th, and that I hoped they would, obey any orders they might receive. I did not give them any other orders that I recollect, but I might have done so. I swear I did not tell them anything about using the edge of their swords. I did not tell them to cut down any men whom they might see in the Stockade. By Mr. Ireland: I could not tell whether any shots were fired before I went down, but I do not know what occurred as I was turning in. I saw the police driven back. Sergeant Lawler can tell you about this expedition.

Sergeant Michael Lawler cross-examined by the Attorney-General: I was at the Stockade. I saw the prisoner Reid there. He had a gun in his hand. He presented and fired it. I saw him again after this nearly in the same place with his face in a different direction. I cannot say whether he had a gun then. I accompanied him up to the camp. I saw him with the other prisoners. There were twenty-six or twenty-seven in the party of prisoners with whom the prisoner was. The witness was cross-examined with some severity by Mr. Michie, but nothing material was elicited from him. John White, trooper, examined by the Attorney-General. I saw prisoner Reid in the stockade on the Sunday: he was dressed in a gray coat, like an Irish coat: he had a long gun in his hand, and was in the act of firing: I did not see him fire. Joseph Rayner examined by the Attorney-General. I am a private in the 40th: I remember seeing the prisoner Campbell in the stockade on the Sunday morning: he fired in the direction of the troops, and ran in: I was within ten yards of him. Cross-examined by Mr. Aspinall. It was light enough for me to see the prisoner. Edward Villette examined by the Attorney-General. I was in the stockade on the Sunday morning: I arrested the prisoner Molloy: there were several others there at the time: he was ten or fifteen yards from the guard tent: Molloy said that was just the commencement, and that we'd have more of it. Cross-examined by Mr. Ireland. I think there were three or four besides the prisoners being driven out at the point of the bayonet, from the stockade, when I arrested Molloy: I took another prisoner, but could not identify him afterwards. Thomas Bradley.— I am a private in the 40th: I was in the stockade on the Sunday morning: I remember the prisoner Molloy being driven out of the stockade and taken prisoner by the last witness: he (prisoner) said he was very sorry, but it was not all

over yet. This witness was cross-examined by Mr. Ireland, but nothing material was elicited from him. George King, examined by the Attorney-General: I am a sergeant of mounted police. I remember the Sunday of the attack on the stockade. I saw a man with a double-barrelled gun running along the holes within fifteen or sixteen yards of the stockade. It was the prisoner Sorenson. I dismounted and followed him. I lost sight of him behind a tent. I went into the nearest tent but could not find him. I found him in the next tent with a revolving carbine presented in his hand. I did not know whether he was going to fire. I said he deserved to be shot. I covered him with my pistol, and made him prisoner. He said "I cannot help it," or words to that effect. Cossack examined by the Attorney-General: I am a lieutenant of police. I was near sergeant King on the Sunday morning when he arrested the prisoner Sorenson. I also arrested the prisoner Phelan. When the troops commenced firing, I went round to the rear of the stockade to attack it in that point, and we there arrested Phelan. By his Honor: We left the camp I should think between two and three o'clock. We arrived near the stockade, just at daybreak. We were about 200 or 300 yards from the stockade when day broke. Cross-examined by Mr Ireland: It took us about

an hour to get to the stockade. The distance might be two miles, or one and a half. John Sincritt, examined by the Attorney-General: I am a trooper. I was at the stockade on the Sunday morning, and saw Phelan the prisoner there with a double gun. I pursued and arrested him. This witness was not cross-examined. James Richardson Gaunt examined by the Attorney-General: The evidence of this witness was almost precisely the same as that of Mr. Bellain, who had been previously examined, witness having been in company with that gentleman, and when they met the prisoner Campbell. The witness was briefly cross-examined by Mr. Dawson, but nothing material was elicited. The placard calling the meeting of Wednesday, was here handed in by the Attorney-General, and identified by a police constable. The Court adjourned at twenty minutes after four to ten o'clock this morning.


############################


